experiment CP4
instrument ESR
start 2000 03 14 1000
end 2000 03 17 1600
status C
description CP4B
contact Tony van Eyken
phone +47 790 21008
email Tony.van.Eyken@esr.eiscat.no 
fax +47 790 21977
operator Tony van Eyken
resources CP(78)
submitter Tony van Eyken
notes
Global ionospheric convection - time-dependent model fitting  
     It is important that all radars concentrate on ionospheric electric field measurements, preferably in the magnetic field  
     aligned position where possible. The IZMIRAN Electrodynamic Model (IZMEM) has been developed from  
     magnetometer data to reproduce the global electric potential patterns for all seasons. The model is time dependent on  
     the magnitude and sign of the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) components. Qualtitative tests of the model using  
     data from the STARE and SABRE coherent radar systems, as well as SUPERDARN, have been very encouraging. For  
     quantitative comparisons, which will allow fine adjustment of the model, it is necessary to get an accurate  
     measurement of the ionospheric electric field at several points on the globe simultaneously. Initial quantitative  
     comparisons with EISCAT are good but lack global coverage. For this purpose, a world day campaign of all available  
     incoherent-backscatter radars would be ideal.  
     A long run of several days (at least 3-5) is best to cover as many IMF conditions as possible. An existing world day  
     run is scheduled for the summer of 1999. As there is a need to cover all seasons, the next choice would be equinox for  
     2000. The exact date is not important, although the predicted position of satellites used for IMF measurements could  
     be taken into consideration in-so-far as this is practical.  
     Contact: Kosch and Levitin   
   Hi-TRAC: High Time Resolution Auroral Radar Convection. Combines incoherent and coherent scatter radars to  
     provide optimum high latitude convection measurements. High latitude radars should endevour to record high-time  
     resolution line-of-sight velocities over as wide a latitude interval as possible. Low latitude radars should use database  
     (q.v.) modes.   
     Contact: John Holt 
