experiment CP1L
instrument ESR
start 2000 10 24 1000
end 2000 10 27 1600
status C
description CP1L
contact Tony van Eyken
phone +47 790 21008
email Tony.van.Eyken@esr.eiscat.no 
fax +47 790 21977
operator Tony van Eyken
resources CP(760)
submitter Tony van Eyken
notes
Global Ionosphere-Thermosphere Coupling Study   
     All radars should measure electron density, ion and electron temperature and ion velocities parallel to the magnetic  
     field direction. Electric field measurements are not essential for monostatic radars.  
     Objectives:  
        1.Fit and constrain global models of the thermosphere (eg. UCL 3D thermospheric model) and ionosphere (eg.  
          Grenoble TRANSCAR model) using simultaneous measurements at F-region altitudes.   
        2.Compute ion-neutral collision frequencies (O-O+) using neutral meridional winds from interferometer and  
          radar measurements. This will include the O-density from the adjusted neutral atmosphere model (from above)  
          and direct neutral temperature measurements where available.   
     Both objectives are best studied during quiet geomagnetic conditions. In the case of substorms, however, a study of the  
     global thermospheric response will be possible. All available interferometers near radar sites suitable for thermospheric  
     measurements should be operated. Neutral wind measurements at OID 630 nm are essential. Neutral temperature  
     measurements at OID 630 nm should be done if possible.  
     All radars should measure in the magnetic field parallel direction. Electron density, ion and electron temperature and  
     ion velocities parallel to the magnetic field direction are required. Ionospheric electric field measurements are not  
     essential for monostatic radars.  
     A long coordinated run is preferred (3-5 days) in order to (1) cover a variety of geomagnetic conditions, (2) measure  
     for extended periods during quiet times to improve the collision frequency estimate and (3) maximise the chance of  
     success due to cloud cover problems for ground-based optical observations. Moon free periods are essential to reduce  
     any optical scattering which can severely affect optical interferometry.  
     This experiment was run in February 1999, however, it would be greatly advantageous to increase the data base.  
     This would help confirm any results and provide for better consistency.  
     Contact: Mike Kosch and Chantal Lathuillere   
Wide-Latitude Substorm Dynamics  
     These are 'floating' days, the exact operation dates to be selected about one month before based on available  
     predictions. Modes with temporal resolutions better than 5 minutes should be used since we need to address substorm  
     phenomena with better time resolution.  
     Contact: John Foster   
SPARC  
     SPARC brings together researchers in upper atmospheric and space physics from around the world, providing them a  
     set of online collaboration tools and workspaces that link together scientific instruments, data, and models. The  
     collaboratory is itself a subject of study by computer and behavioral scientists who are developing and refining the  
     tools and organizational structures that will make such real-time, online collaborative research commonplace.  
     Contact: Tim Killeen 
