experiment ESPRIT
instrument TRO
start 2006 06 27 1000
end 2006 06 30 1700
status R
description ESPRIT and HotPay1 rocket campaigns at Andøya Rocket Range
contact Eivind Thrane
phone +4791198982
email eivind@rocketrange.no
fax +4767060226
operator Magnar Gullikstad Johnsen
submitter Eivind Thrane
resources NO(10)
notes
A campaign comprising two sounding rockets and a comprehensive set of ground-
based instruments will be carried out from Andøya Rocket Range in the period 
27th June to 6 July 2006. The purpose of the campaign is to study the 
mesosphere and lower ionosphere during a period with noctilucent clouds (NLC) 
and Polar Summer Mesospheric Echoes (PMSE).  The launches of two different 
rocket payloads will be coordinated in a salvo within a period of about 30 
minutes. An additional requirement for the salvo is the presence of a weak to 
moderate auroral disturbance with particle precipitation in the mesopause and 
E-region. The two rocket payloads are codenamed ESPRIT and HotPay1.

·         ESPRIT is a US-Norwegian student project in which students from Penn 
State University, the Universities in Oslo and Bergen as well as the Technical 
College of Narvik have built and instrumented the payload. NASA is responsible 
for the rocket configuration and Andøya Rocket Range for the launch and range 
operations. 

·          HotPay1 is the first of two rocket projects financed by EU through 
the. This project was initiated by ALOMAR through an application to EU’s 6th 
Framework Programme. The payload has been built as part of ARR’s Hotel Payload 
Project and is instrumented by a series of European research institutions.

·         From the ground ALOMAR scientists will take part in the campaign 
with all relevant lidar and radar instruments. 

I attach some information on ESPRIT and Hotpay as well as the launch 
conditions. It would be of great scientific interest to the participating 
scientists to have the support of EISCAT observations during the campaign. We 
see two relevant types of observations: observations of the ionospheric plasma 
above Andenes, near the rocket trajectories and possibly VHF observations of 
PMSE vertically above the EISCAT site. The latter observation would make it 
possible to compare EISCAT PMSE observation with the ALOMAR ALWIN VHF radar at 
Andenes. Imaging riometers at Ramfjord and Andenes could map the horisontal 
extent  and variation of the electron precipitation and add to our knowledge 
of the formation of PMSE.

 

With this background I apply for 10 hrs of Norwegian EISCAT time on behalf of 
my Norwegian colleagues participating in the campaign. Our Swedish colleagues 
from the  Meteorological Institute, Stockholm University and German colleagues 
from Leibniz Institute for Atmospheric Physics will also apply for 10 and 20 
hours respectively from their national EISCAT quota. The total sum of 40 hrs 
will be distributed over the 10 campaign days. The daily launch window will be 
open from 10-17 hrs local time. Because we need clear skies for the lidar 
measurements, the launch operations will be cancelled in case of cloudy skies, 
in which case we hope to save our EISCAT hours for better conditions. We are 
ready to discuss the detailed implementation of the EISCAT observations with 
the EISCAT staff, and should also appreciate advice from you in this matter.


