experiment RENU
instrument ESR
start 2010 12 05 0300
end 2010 12 05 0900
status R
description EISCAT time for the RENU rocket launch
contact Kjellmar Oksavik
phone +47-79023387
email kjellmar.oksavik@unis.no
operator Kjellmar Oksavik
submitter Kjellmar Oksavik
resources SP(6)
notes
Accelerometer measurements from satellites (e.g. CHAMP; Lühr et al [2004]) 
have revealed that the cusp ionosphere is dominant region of thermospheric 
upwelling and increased satellite drag. Previous theoretical and observational 
studies have shown that Joule heating is fundamental to upwelling, at least at 
lower latitudes. But at higher latitudes the situation is more complex and 
recent results show that Joule heating alone is not enough. Other mechanisms 
may also influence the thermospheric upwelling; e.g. strong field-aligned 
currents, soft electron precipitation, Alfvénic aurora, etc. To address these 
issues a sounding rocket will be launched into the cusp ionosphere over 
Svalbard in the time range Nov 28 – Dec 12, 2010. This rocket is called RENU 
(Rocket Experiment for Neutral Upwelling, PI: Marc Lessard), and every day the 
launch window is 0300-0900 UT. A successful rocket mission depends on 
continuous operation of a series of ground-based instruments in the launch 
window; radars (EISCAT and CUTLASS), optical instruments in Longyearbyen and 
Ny-Aalesund (all-sky cameras, scanning photometers, magnetometers, etc). These 
instruments will serve both as launch diagnostics (i.e. to identify the 
optimal time to launch), and as supplementary data to the actual rocket 
measurements. After the campaign these data will also be implemented into 
models like AMIE and TIME CGM in order to provide new insight into the 
physical processes of upwelling of thermospheric gas in the cusp region.

RENU is a four-stage NASA Black Brant XII sounding rocket that will be 
launched from Andøya Rocket Range, Norway. The RENU apogee will be in 572 km 
apogee, just south of Svalbard. RENU will pass over Ny-Aalesund (in the 
vicinity of the ESR) in 450 km altitude on its way down; i.e. RENU will drop 
in altitude while it is in the cusp and thereby maximize the vertical extent 
of measurements in the cusp. RENU will carry instruments that collect data on 
particle precipitation and electric/magnetic fields in regions where heating 
is expected to occur. 

Required ground-based instrumentation: Continuous operation of EISCAT radars 
is key to a successful RENU mission. EISCAT will monitor conditions along the 
rocket trajectory in real-time; before, during, and after launch. The ESR 32m 
and Tromsø UHF antennae will monitor conditions at a point along the rocket 
trajectory, for comparison with RENU in-situ particle and field observations. 
The ESR 42m and Tromsø VHF will monitor nearby flux tubes over Longyearbyen. 
The 32m antenna will be aligned nearly vertical, but skewed slightly to the 
west to acquire data near the footprint of RENU in the middle of the cusp. The 
Tromsø UHF and VHF radars will be aligned northward at 30 degree elevation to 
provide real-time information on the latitudinal location of Joule heating 
(Ti), and the equatorward boundary of cusp precipitation (high Te boundary). 
CUTLASS will measure convection and horizontal drifts. All instruments at 
Kjell Henriksen Observatory (KHO) will also be operational during the rocket 
flight. 

Specific objectives:

1. To measure neutral gas, ion, and electron temperature enhancements, which 
will provide an initial assessment of the upwelling process.

2. To measure large- and small-scale Joule heating in the cusp during the RENU 
overflight. Large-scale data will be acquired by EISCAT; small-scale data 
(perhaps associated with Alfvén waves) will be acquired using onboard electric 
field measurements.

3. To measure the precipitating electron energy input. Theory and observations 
suggest that various types of electron precipitation may contribute to neutral 
upwelling; knowledge of the precipitating population is critical for 
understanding this effect.

4. To use measured quantities as inputs to “thermodynamic” 
and “electrodynamic” models for comparison to the observed upwelling.
