experiment PHOCUS
instrument VHF
start 2011 07 11 1100
end 2011 07 11 1400
status R
description Support of the PHOCUS rocket from Esrange
contact Jonas Hedin
phone +46-8-164232
email jonash@misu.su.se
fax +46-8-157185
operator Jonas Hedin
submitter Stephan Buchert
resources SW(93),GE(31)
notes
PHOCUS (Particles, Hydrogen and Oxygen Chemistry in the Upper
mesopshere in Summer) addresses basic questions of the polar summer
mesosphere. Major science objectives concern the interaction of
mesospheric particles (ice and meteoric smoke) with their neutral and charged 
environment. A major rocket payload will be launched carrying 17 scientific 
instruments from seven research groups: Stockholm University and Chalmers 
Technical University (Sweden), Leibniz-Institute for Atmospheric Physics
(Germany), University of Tromsø and Norwegian Defense Research
Establishment (Norway), Technical University Graz (Austria), and
University of Colorado (USA). The launch is planned for daytime
conditions, i.e. with the Sun well above the horison. The rocket will
be complemented by ground-based measurements, in particular local
measurements of noctilucent clouds (NLC) by the Esrange lidar and of
polar mesosphere summer echoes (PMSE) by the ESRAD radar.

There are two major interests in using EISCAT data:

- The presence and characteristics of polar mesosphere summer echoes.
> PMSE will be monitored with ESRAD at 52 MHz.
EISCAT can provide complementary measurements at 224 and 930 MHz. This
allows a study of the frequency dependence of PMSE, which has been
shown to provide important information of the properties of the
mesospheric ice particle population.

- Characterisation of the background state of the ionosphere. A better
understanding of the interactions of ice and smoke particles with the
electrons and ions of the ionospheric D-region is a major objective of
PHOCUS. EISCAT can provide us with ionisation conditions and electron
densities as well as their temporal development. This will be
co-analysed with in-situ measurements of the charge state of
mesospheric particles.
