experiment JUNO
instrument TRO
start 2013 10 09 1600
end 2013 10 09 2400
description EISCAT Experiments in Support of the Juno Earth Flyby
contact Rob Fear
phone +441162523548
email rcf11@ion.le.ac.uk
operator tbd
submitter Ian McCrea
resources UK(8)
notes
UHF: runexp /kst/exp/manda/manda lm cp1 UK
ESR: runexp /kst/exp/folke/folke lm lowelnorth UK


This is a booking for a joint ESR and UHF experiment to monitor the Juno Earth 
flyby will be a co-ordinated campaign involving Sondrestron and Millstone Hill 
as well as EISCAT.  The following is an abstract for the 2013 Fall AGU Meeting, 
submitted by Rob Fear, summarisng the objectives 
of the experiment.

"On 9th October 2013, the Juno spacecraft will undergo a gravitational slingshot 
as it passes Earth en route to Jupiter. In doing so, the trajectory of Juno will 
take it through the Earth's magnetosphere. The spacecraft will enter the 
magnetosphere at the post-noon, low-latitude dayside magnetopause, and will make 
its outbound magnetopause crossing at mid northern latitudes on the dawn flank 
approximately 15 Earth radii down-tail. Customised operations of a range of 
ground-based ionospheric instrumentation are planned in support of the in situ 
observations of the terrestrial magnetosphere that will be made by Juno. Global 
scale observations will be provided by the SuperDARN network of coherent scatter 
radars. SuperDARN consists of 21 radars in the northern hemisphere and 11 in the 
southern hemisphere; the fields of view of the SuperDARN radars cover the polar 
cap, auroral regions and mid latitudes.

The ionospheric footprint of the Juno spacecraft will be within the SuperDARN 
field of view for most of the time that the spacecraft is within the 
magnetosphere. Local observations will be provided by three incoherent scatter 
radars: Millstone Hill (situated in Massachusetts), Sondrestrom (western 
Greenland) and the EISCAT Svalbard Radar (situated poleward of mainland Norway 
on the archipelago of Svalbard). As Juno first crosses the magnetopause and 
traverses the dayside magnetosphere, its magnetic footprint is expected to map 
to the region of the ionosphere observed by Millstone Hill and Sondrestrom, 
whilst the EISCAT Svalbard Radar will provide observations of the region of the 
ionosphere that maps to the section of the magnetotail to be sampled by Juno 
shortly before its outward magnetopause crossing. In this talk, we will present 
an overview of the geometry of the conjunctions between Juno and these 
ionospheric instruments and preliminary ionospheric observations from this 
interval."


