experiment SWARM_EFI
instrument TRO
start 2013 12 09 1100
end 2013 12 09 1300
description Support for the commissioning of the Swarm Electric Field Instruments
contact Stephan Buchert
phone +46708566324
email scb@irfu.se
operator Stephan Buchert
submitter Stephan Buchert
resources SW(50)
notes
Eros commands:
runexp /kst/exp/bella/bella lm cp1 SW
pointdir 189 74
enablerec



Three Swarm satellites will be launched on November 22 into polar
orbits. They carry Langmuir probes designed and built by IRF Uppsala and
a new type of thermal ion imagers (TII) by the University of Calgary, PI
David Knudsen. Together the LPs and TIIs form the electric field
instruments (EFIs). From the EFI data electron density and temperature,
ion drift vector and temperature and the electric field will be derived,
essentialy the same parameters as EISCAT measures (but with very
different spatial coverage and temporal resolutions).
 
EISCAT is planning to conduct regular all Associates (AA) experiments
related to the Swarm mission for various general scientific purposes in
a similar manner as it was done for the Cluster mission. This would
start after the commissioning phase of Swarm, i.e. commence
earliest 3 months after the Swarm launch, that is after February 2014,
when also the Swarm Level1 products will become available to the science 
community.
 
With this application we would like to cover the commissioning of
the EFI in december 2013. EISCAT data will be used to validate the Swarm
EFIs and optimize their performance. Addressed science topics
include the comparison of voltage-current characteristics of LPs
(with different titanium-nitride and gold surfaces) with "unbiased"
incoherent scatter measurements of electron density and temperature,
and of 3-d distribution images of the TIIs with the "unbiased" ion
drifts and temperatures derived from the radar data.

Because the exact satellite orbits are not known yet, and will be changed 
frequently during commissioning in order to put the satellites into their more 
permanent orbits, we cannot predict yet when passes over EISCAT can be covered, 
and the initally requested EISCAT operations are preliminary times.


