experiment ICI4
instrument ESR
start 2014 10 23 1700
end 2014 10 23 2159
status R
description F-region auroral blob investigation around magnetic midnigh
contact Jøran Moen
phone +4791556414
email jmoen@fys.uio.no
fax +4722855671
operator Christer van der Meeren
submitter Jøran Moen
resources NI(14)
notes
The main objective of ICI-4,  to be launched from Andøya Space Centre, is to
explore F-region plasma instability processes in connection with auroral blobs.
The phenomenon is created when polar cap patches, islands of high electron
density plasma, exit the polar cap at night, i.e. when they entering the night
time auroral oval. The ingredients are high density F-region plasma structures,
imposed by auroral precipitation, field aligned currents and flow shears. This
appears to be the most violent situation for GPS scintillations. This region is
a highly complex region of the auroral ionosphere driven by tail reconnection.
In order to precisely diagnose the launch conditions we will combine
information from the ACE satellite, radars and all-sky imagers as well as
ground magnetometers. The campaign period allows 14 effective days from 16-30.
October. At the day when rocket is launched we will stop the radar operation as
soon as we have got the large scale context of the detailed in-situ
measurements. ESR will be operated in an azimuthal scan mode to survey
transport of polar cap patch material across the rocket trajectory. EISCAT UHF
will be pointed across the rocket trajectory.

For the operation of ESR, 24 hours of Norwegian time and 14 hours of Japanese
time have been allotted to support the ICI-4 mission. Some runs will be
scrubbed due to bad weather conditions or extremely quite geophysical
conditions (prolonged periods of northward IMF). If we run out of experiment
time, we will potentially get 10 hours of French time to support ICI-4.

For the operation of EISCAT UHF, we have got 14 hours of Norwegian radar time
at EISCAT Tromsø that we schedule the first three nights of the campaign.


